# joeac's wishlog

Hi! I'm Joe Carstairs, and you've found my wishlog. Sometimes, when I have a wish, I put it here. You can use this if you're curious what things I'm interested in. You may also use it if you're looking for gift ideas (that's very nice of you, you really shouldn't), though not everything on this list is buyable or makeable or even a thing.

This list is pretty short just now because I've just started it. Maybe it'll grow! You've got to start some time.

## 2026-04-06

I'd love to get to know more myths and fairy tales. I'd love a good translation of the Odyssey, or a good telling of other Greek myths, or Neil Gaiman's Norse myths, or some sagas, or…

## 2026-04-05

I had an unexpected craving to go back to The Elder Scrolls III: Morrowind, a computer game I was obsessed with between the ages of about 16 and 18. I actually got as far as looking at prices for GPUs. I don't currently have a GPU in my computer, since I haven't played computer games for years. Playing Morrowind with enough mods to make it fun would require a GPU of some kind, though I find it really hard to judge what card would be appropriate. In the end, I remembered that I actually quite like not being addicted to computer games, and the sudden craving gradually faded.

## 2026-04-04

I wish I had a copy of Shakespeare's sonnets. I'd love to memorise Sonnet 18.

## 2026-04-03

I wish I was better at languages.

## 2026-04-02

I wish there was a version of the Bible that was like the Authorised Version but with fewer errors.

## 2026-04-01

I wish I set aside time to read the Bible and read literature and sometimes write sonnets.
